README.md, before:

# Validated Patterns common/ repository

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache%202.0-blue.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/Apache-2.0)

## Note

This is the `main` branch of common and it assumes that the pattern is fully
multisource (meaning that any used charts from VP is actually referenced from
either a helm chart repository or quay repository). I.e. there are no helm
charts contained in this branch of common and there is no ansible code neither.

The helm charts now live in separate repositories under the VP
[organization](https://github.com/validatedpatterns) on GitHub. The repositories are:

- clustergroup-chart
- pattern-install-chart
- hashicorp-vault-chart
- golang-external-secrets-chart
- acm-chart
- letsencrypt-chart

The ansible bits live in this [repository](https://github.com/validatedpatterns/rhvp.cluster_utils)

In order to be able to use this "slimmed-down" main branch of common you *must*
use a 0.9.* clustergroup-chart that. Add the following to your `values-global.yaml`:

```yaml
main:
  multiSourceConfig:
    enabled: true
    clusterGroupChartVersion: 0.9.*
```

## Start Here

This repository is never used as standalone. It is usually imported in each pattern as a subtree.
In order to import the common/ the very first time you can use
`https://github.com/validatedpatterns/multicloud-gitops/blob/main/common/scripts/make_common_subtree.sh`

In order to update your common subtree inside your pattern repository you can either use
`https://github.com/validatedpatterns/utilities/blob/main/scripts/update-common-everywhere.sh` or
do it manually by doing the following:

```sh
git remote add -f upstream-common https://github.com/validatedpatterns/common.git
git merge -s subtree -Xtheirs -Xsubtree=common upstream-common/main
```

## Secrets

There are two different secret formats parsed by the ansible bits. Both are documented [here](https://github.com/validatedpatterns/common/tree/main/ansible/roles/vault_utils/README.md)

Commit message:

update how to make common subtree
A few small changes in this commit:
* Update README to reference the `make-common-subtree` script in common rather than MCG repo
* Update README and `make-common-subtree` script to use same default remote name for common subtree
that we use in our `update-common-everywhere` script.
* Update file name for the script to use dashes rather than underscores for consistency
* Update the name of our GH org to `validatedpatterns`

README.md, after:

# Validated Patterns common/ repository

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache%202.0-blue.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/Apache-2.0)

## Note

This is the `main` branch of common and it assumes that the pattern is fully
multisource (meaning that any used charts from VP is actually referenced from
either a helm chart repository or quay repository). I.e. there are no helm
charts contained in this branch of common and there is no ansible code neither.

The helm charts now live in separate repositories under the VP
[organization](https://github.com/validatedpatterns) on GitHub. The repositories are:

- clustergroup-chart
- pattern-install-chart
- hashicorp-vault-chart
- golang-external-secrets-chart
- acm-chart
- letsencrypt-chart

The ansible bits live in this [repository](https://github.com/validatedpatterns/rhvp.cluster_utils)

In order to be able to use this "slimmed-down" main branch of common you *must*
use a 0.9.* clustergroup-chart that. Add the following to your `values-global.yaml`:

```yaml
main:
  multiSourceConfig:
    enabled: true
    clusterGroupChartVersion: 0.9.*
```

## Start Here

This repository is never used as standalone. It is usually imported in each pattern as a subtree.
In order to import the common subtree the very first time you can use the script
[make_common_subtree.sh](scripts/make-common-subtree.sh).

In order to update your common subtree inside your pattern repository you can either use
`https://github.com/validatedpatterns/utilities/blob/main/scripts/update-common-everywhere.sh` or
do it manually with the following commands:

```sh
git remote add -f common-upstream https://github.com/validatedpatterns/common.git
git merge -s subtree -Xtheirs -Xsubtree=common common-upstream/main
```

## Secrets

There are two different secret formats parsed by the ansible bits. Both are documented [here](https://github.com/validatedpatterns/common/tree/main/ansible/roles/vault_utils/README.md)
