docs/blog/15-security-incident-automation.md, before:

# Security Incident Response Automation

*Part 15 of the OpenShift AI Ops Learning Series*

---

## Introduction

Security incidents require rapid response. This guide covers automated security threat detection, incident response workflows, containment strategies, and compliance automation.

---

## What You'll Learn

- Detecting security incidents
- Implementing automated responses
- Coordinating incident remediation
- Tracking security events
- Generating incident reports

---

## Prerequisites

Before starting, ensure you have:

- [ ] Completed [Blog 7: Rule-Based Remediation](07-rule-based-remediation.md)
- [ ] Security monitoring tools deployed
- [ ] Network policies configured
- [ ] RBAC policies in place

---

## Step 1: Detect Security Incidents

### Open the Security Automation Notebook

1. Navigate to `notebooks/08-advanced-scenarios/`
2. Open `security-incident-response-automation.ipynb`

### Monitor Security Events

```python
def detect_security_incidents(namespace, time_range='1h'):
    """
    Detect security incidents from cluster events.
    
    Args:
        namespace: Kubernetes namespace
        time_range: Time range to analyze
    
    Returns:
        List of detected security incidents
    """
    from kubernetes import client, config
    
    config.load_incluster_config()
    v1 = client.CoreV1Api()
    
    incidents = []
    
    # Get recent events
    events = v1.list_namespaced_event(namespace)
    
    # Security event patterns
    security_patterns = {
        'unauthorized_access': ['Forbidden', 'Unauthorized', 'Access denied'],
        'privilege_escalation': ['privilege', 'escalation', 'root'],
        'suspicious_activity': ['unusual', 'suspicious', 'anomalous'],
        'network_breach': ['network policy', 'connection refused', 'firewall'],
        'image_vulnerability': ['vulnerability', 'CVE', 'security scan failed']
    }
    
    for event in events.items:
        for incident_type, patterns in security_patterns.items():
            if any(pattern.lower() in event.message.lower() for pattern in patterns):
                incidents.append({
                    'type': incident_type,
                    'severity': 'high',
                    'message': event.message,
                    'timestamp': event.last_timestamp,
                    'involved_object': event.involved_object.name
                })
    
    return incidents
```

---

## Step 2: Automated Containment

### Isolate Affected Resources

```python
def contain_security_incident(incident):
    """
    Automatically contain security incident.
    
    Args:
        incident: Detected security incident
    """
    if incident['type'] == 'unauthorized_access':
        # Revoke RBAC permissions
        revoke_rbac_access(incident['involved_object'])
    
    elif incident['type'] == 'network_breach':
        # Apply network policy to isolate pod
        apply_network_policy(incident['involved_object'], 'deny-all')
    
    elif incident['type'] == 'privilege_escalation':
        # Delete pod to prevent further access
        delete_pod(incident['involved_object'])
    
    print(f"🔒 Contained security incident: {incident['type']}")
```

---

## Step 3: Incident Response Workflow

### Automated Response Pipeline

```python
def handle_security_incident(incident):
    """
    Execute automated security incident response.
    
    Args:
        incident: Detected security incident
    """
    # 1. Contain
    contain_security_incident(incident)
    
    # 2. Investigate
    investigation = investigate_incident(incident)
    
    # 3. Remediate
    remediation = remediate_incident(incident, investigation)
    
    # 4. Report
    generate_incident_report(incident, investigation, remediation)
    
    return {
        'contained': True,
        'investigated': True,
        'remediated': remediation['success'],
        'reported': True
    }
```

---

## What Just Happened?

You've implemented security automation:

### 1. Threat Detection

- **Event monitoring**: Analyze cluster events for security patterns
- **Pattern matching**: Identify known threat signatures
- **Severity classification**: Categorize incident severity

### 2. Automated Containment

- **RBAC revocation**: Remove unauthorized access
- **Network isolation**: Apply deny-all network policies
- **Pod termination**: Stop compromised workloads

### 3. Incident Response

- **Containment**: Isolate affected resources
- **Investigation**: Analyze root cause
- **Remediation**: Fix security issues
- **Reporting**: Generate compliance reports

---

## Next Steps

You've completed the blog series! Explore:

1. **All Blogs**: Review [BLOG-SERIES-PROPOSAL.md](BLOG-SERIES-PROPOSAL.md) for the complete index
2. **Contribute**: Help improve the platform and documentation
3. **Deploy**: Use the platform in your own clusters

---

## Related Resources

- **Notebook**: `notebooks/08-advanced-scenarios/security-incident-response-automation.ipynb`
- **ADRs**: See `docs/adrs/` for architectural decisions

---

## Found an Issue?

If you encounter problems while following this guide:

1. **Open a GitHub Issue**: [Create Issue](https://github.com/tosin2013/openshift-aiops-platform/issues/new)
   - Use label: `blog-feedback`
   - Include: Blog name, step number, error message

2. **Contribute a Fix**: PRs welcome!
   - Fork the repo
   - Fix the issue in `docs/blog/15-security-incident-automation.md`
   - Submit PR referencing the issue

Your feedback helps improve this guide for everyone!

---

*Part 15 of 15 in the OpenShift AI Ops Learning Series - Series Complete! 🎉*

Commit message:

docs(blog): reorganize blog structure
- Delete BLOG-SERIES-PROPOSAL.md (no longer needed)
- Rename end-to-end-self-healing-with-lightspeed.md to 16-end-to-end-self-healing-with-lightspeed.md
- Update all references to the renamed file in:
  - docs/blog/15-security-incident-automation.md
  - docs/github-issues/README.md
  - docs/github-issues/mcp-server-tool-default-behavior.md
  - docs/implementation-plan-prediction-features.md

This makes Blog 16 the final blog in the series, with a clear numbered
sequence from 1-16.

Signed-off-by: Tosin Akinosho <takinosh@redhat.com>

docs/blog/15-security-incident-automation.md, after:

# Security Incident Response Automation

*Part 15 of the OpenShift AI Ops Learning Series*

---

## Introduction

Security incidents require rapid response. This guide covers automated security threat detection, incident response workflows, containment strategies, and compliance automation.

---

## What You'll Learn

- Detecting security incidents
- Implementing automated responses
- Coordinating incident remediation
- Tracking security events
- Generating incident reports

---

## Prerequisites

Before starting, ensure you have:

- [ ] Completed [Blog 7: Rule-Based Remediation](07-rule-based-remediation.md)
- [ ] Security monitoring tools deployed
- [ ] Network policies configured
- [ ] RBAC policies in place

---

## Step 1: Detect Security Incidents

### Open the Security Automation Notebook

1. Navigate to `notebooks/08-advanced-scenarios/`
2. Open `security-incident-response-automation.ipynb`

### Monitor Security Events

```python
def detect_security_incidents(namespace, time_range='1h'):
    """
    Detect security incidents from cluster events.
    
    Args:
        namespace: Kubernetes namespace
        time_range: Time range to analyze
    
    Returns:
        List of detected security incidents
    """
    from kubernetes import client, config
    
    config.load_incluster_config()
    v1 = client.CoreV1Api()
    
    incidents = []
    
    # Get recent events
    events = v1.list_namespaced_event(namespace)
    
    # Security event patterns
    security_patterns = {
        'unauthorized_access': ['Forbidden', 'Unauthorized', 'Access denied'],
        'privilege_escalation': ['privilege', 'escalation', 'root'],
        'suspicious_activity': ['unusual', 'suspicious', 'anomalous'],
        'network_breach': ['network policy', 'connection refused', 'firewall'],
        'image_vulnerability': ['vulnerability', 'CVE', 'security scan failed']
    }
    
    for event in events.items:
        for incident_type, patterns in security_patterns.items():
            if any(pattern.lower() in event.message.lower() for pattern in patterns):
                incidents.append({
                    'type': incident_type,
                    'severity': 'high',
                    'message': event.message,
                    'timestamp': event.last_timestamp,
                    'involved_object': event.involved_object.name
                })
    
    return incidents
```

---

## Step 2: Automated Containment

### Isolate Affected Resources

```python
def contain_security_incident(incident):
    """
    Automatically contain security incident.
    
    Args:
        incident: Detected security incident
    """
    if incident['type'] == 'unauthorized_access':
        # Revoke RBAC permissions
        revoke_rbac_access(incident['involved_object'])
    
    elif incident['type'] == 'network_breach':
        # Apply network policy to isolate pod
        apply_network_policy(incident['involved_object'], 'deny-all')
    
    elif incident['type'] == 'privilege_escalation':
        # Delete pod to prevent further access
        delete_pod(incident['involved_object'])
    
    print(f"🔒 Contained security incident: {incident['type']}")
```

---

## Step 3: Incident Response Workflow

### Automated Response Pipeline

```python
def handle_security_incident(incident):
    """
    Execute automated security incident response.
    
    Args:
        incident: Detected security incident
    """
    # 1. Contain
    contain_security_incident(incident)
    
    # 2. Investigate
    investigation = investigate_incident(incident)
    
    # 3. Remediate
    remediation = remediate_incident(incident, investigation)
    
    # 4. Report
    generate_incident_report(incident, investigation, remediation)
    
    return {
        'contained': True,
        'investigated': True,
        'remediated': remediation['success'],
        'reported': True
    }
```

---

## What Just Happened?

You've implemented security automation:

### 1. Threat Detection

- **Event monitoring**: Analyze cluster events for security patterns
- **Pattern matching**: Identify known threat signatures
- **Severity classification**: Categorize incident severity

### 2. Automated Containment

- **RBAC revocation**: Remove unauthorized access
- **Network isolation**: Apply deny-all network policies
- **Pod termination**: Stop compromised workloads

### 3. Incident Response

- **Containment**: Isolate affected resources
- **Investigation**: Analyze root cause
- **Remediation**: Fix security issues
- **Reporting**: Generate compliance reports

---

## Next Steps

You've completed the blog series! Explore:

1. **All Blogs**: See the `docs/blog/` directory for the complete blog series (Blogs 1-16)
2. **Contribute**: Help improve the platform and documentation
3. **Deploy**: Use the platform in your own clusters

---

## Related Resources

- **Notebook**: `notebooks/08-advanced-scenarios/security-incident-response-automation.ipynb`
- **ADRs**: See `docs/adrs/` for architectural decisions

---

## Found an Issue?

If you encounter problems while following this guide:

1. **Open a GitHub Issue**: [Create Issue](https://github.com/tosin2013/openshift-aiops-platform/issues/new)
   - Use label: `blog-feedback`
   - Include: Blog name, step number, error message

2. **Contribute a Fix**: PRs welcome!
   - Fork the repo
   - Fix the issue in `docs/blog/15-security-incident-automation.md`
   - Submit PR referencing the issue

Your feedback helps improve this guide for everyone!

---

*Part 15 of 15 in the OpenShift AI Ops Learning Series - Series Complete! 🎉*
